CSML scripts
============

The CSML system is made of a compiler and a runtime support library. The
compiler takes a CSML script which describes C# and OCaml components to
be exported from their native language to the other one, and produces a
number of OCaml and C# source files. Those files have to be compiled
and linked with the rest of the application and the CSML runtime support
library.

The CSML scripts usually have the extension `.csml`. They
describe how imported components should look like in their target
language. For instance, here is one section of such a script:

    mlfile "getting_started_cs.ml"

    module FooBar: sig
      val bipbip: int -> int -> unit = static Getting.Started.Foo.BipBip
    end

This section tells the compiler to produce an OCaml file
`getting_started_cs.ml` that imports the static method
`Getting.Started.Foo.BipBip` defined in C#. This method should be
wrapped as an OCaml function called `bipbip` located in a
submodule `FooBar` of the OCaml compilation unit
`Getting_started_cs`. To be compatible with the code above, the C#
method must have the following signature:

      public static void BipBip(int, int);

If the signature of the method is different, there is a type-error when
the C# files generated by the script are compiled.

Let us look at an example of how to import functions from OCaml to C#.

    csfile "getting_started_csml.cs"

    namespace Getting.Started {
      public static class Foo {
        public static class MyStaticClass {
          public static string DoSomething(string) = Getting_started.do_something;
        }
      }
    }

This section tells the compiler to produce a C# file
`getting_started_csml.cs` which defines a static class `Foo`
in the namespace `Getting.Started`, with a static inner-class
`MyStaticClass` that contains a single static method
`DoSomething`. This method is imported from the OCaml
function `Getting_started.do_something`, which must have type
`string -> string`.

Here are some more examples of OCaml signatures together with their C#
equivalent (for CSML):

  OCaml                 | C#
  ----------------------|-------------------
  `unit -> unit`        | `void F();`
  `int -> unit`         | `void F(int);`
  `unit -> int`         | `int F();`
  `int -> int -> unit`  | `void F(int, int);`
  `int -> int -> int`   | `int F(int, int);`

Basic types
-----------

For most basic types, there is a natural correspondence between C# and
OCaml.

  C#           | OCaml
  -------------|--------
  `void`       | `unit`
  `int`        | `int`
  `long`       | `int64`
  `double`     | `float`
  `string`     | `string`
  `bool`       | `bool`
  `Exception`  | `exn`

### Integers

The OCaml type `int` stores 31-bit integers (on 32-bits
machines). When a C# integer that does fit within 31-bit is translated
to OCaml, the behavior is not specified.

### Strings

C# strings represent sequences of Unicode characters. When copied to
and from C#, OCaml strings are interpreted as sequences of characters
in the Latin1 (iso-9959-1) subset of Unicode. If a C# string that
contains code points >= 256 is copied to OCaml, the result is
undefined. An OCaml string copied to C# and then back to OCaml is
guaranteed to be equal to the original string.

### Blobs

OCaml strings are often used as sequences of bytes. To support this
common case, CSML understands a special type, written `byte[]` in C#
signatures and `blob` in OCaml signatures. This type is mapped to the
OCaml type `string` and to the C# type `byte[]`.

For instance, the following specification assumes that the imported
OCaml function has type `string -> string`:

      public static string f(byte[]) = M.f;

and the following specification assumes that the imported C# method has
signature `byte[] F(byte[])`.

      val f: blob -> blob = static C.F

### void/unit

The C# `void` "type" can only appear as the result type of a
method. It corresponds to the result type `unit` in OCaml. A
C# method that takes an empty list of arguments corresponds to an OCaml
function that takes a single argument of type `unit`. The
type `unit` can only appear as the single argument of a
function and/or as the result of a function.

Structural types
----------------

Structural types (lists, arrays, options, tuples) are very common in
OCaml signatures.

### List and arrays

List and arrays have a natural correspondence in C#.

  C#         | OCaml
  -----------|----------
  `T[]`      | `'a array`
  `List<T>`  | `'a list`

The C# generic class `List` is defined in the namespace
`System.Collections.Generic` (but one simply write `List` in
CSML scripts). The following line is an example of how to import in
OCaml a C# static method of signature `List<string[]> F(List<int>)`.

      val f: int list -> string array list = static C.F

### Options, nullable types

In OCaml, the built-in parameterized type `option` is defined
as:

    type 'a option = Some of 'a | None

CSML's standard library defines a C# generic class
`Lexifi.Interop.Option<T>` to reflect this type. Here is the current
signature for this class:

      public class OptionNoneException : Lexifi.LexiFi_exception {
        public OptionNoneException(Type T);
      }
      public class Option<T> {
        public Option(T x);  // Create a Some option
        public Option();     // Create a None option
        public bool Is_some{ get; } // Check whether the option is Some
        public void Clear(); // Set the option to None
        public T Val { get; set; } // Get or set the value
      }

The getter of the property `Val` throw an exception
`Lexifi.Interop.OptionNoneException` if the current value of
the option is `None`.

In some cases, we do not want to reflect an OCaml option type explicitly
in C#. Instead, we might like to use the C# `null` value to
represent `None`. The CSML compiler understands a pseudo-type
written `'a nullable` in OCaml parts and `Nullable<T>`
in C# parts. This type really means `'a option` in
OCaml and just `T` in C#: `Some` values are
mapped to and from values of type `T` and `None`
is mapped to and from `null`. Here is an example that shows
how to use this feature to import a function from C# to OCaml:

    val f: unit -> string nullable = static Myclass.f

The resulting OCaml function `f` has type `unit ->
string option`, but the static method `Myclass.f`
returns a `string`, not a `Option<string>` as
would be the case if `option` had been used instead of
`nullable`.

### Tuples

  C#                 | OCaml
  -------------------|-------------------
  `Tuple<T1,...Tn>`  | `'a1 * ... * 'an`

To reflect OCaml tuple types, CSML's standard library defines C#
generic classes `Lexifi.Interop.Tuple<T0,T1>`, `Lexifi.Interop.Tuple<T0,T1,T2>`, ...,
`Lexifi.Interop.Tuple<T0,T1,...,T10>`. Here is the current signature for
one of them:

      public class Tuple<T0, T1, T2, T3> {
        public Tuple(T0 arg0, T1 arg1, T2 arg2, T3 arg3);
        public T0 TVal0 { get; set }
        public T1 TVal1 { get; set }
        public T2 TVal2 { get; set }
        public T3 TVal3 { get; set }
      }

Let us look at the following example of a CSML script fragment:

    public static class C {
      public static Tuple<Option<int>,string,int>
                        f(Option<Tuple<string,string>>) = M.f;
    }

The imported OCaml function `M.f` must have type
`(string * string) option -> (int option * string *
int)`. Here is an example of how to call the imported function:

      Tuple<Option<int>,string,int> r =
        C.f(new Option<Tuple<string,string>>(
               new Tuple<string,string>("a", "b")));
      if (r.TVal0.Is_some)
        System.Console.WriteLine("I = " + r.TVal0.Val);
      System.Console.WriteLine("S = " + r.TVal1);

### Functions

  C#                    | OCaml
  ----------------------|------------------------------
  `ArrowVoid`           | `unit -> unit`
  `Arrow<S>`            | `unit -> 'a`
  `ArrowVoid<T1,...Tn>` | `'a1 -> ... -> 'an -> unit`
  `Arrow<T1,...Tn,S>`   | `'a1 -> ... -> 'an -> 'b`

Function types and first-class functions are key features of the OCaml
language. They are also available in C#. CSML's standard library
defines families of C# generic delegates as the counterpart of OCaml's
function types:

      public delegate S Arrow<S>();
      public delegate S Arrow<T0, S>(T0 arg0);
      public delegate S Arrow<T0, T1, S>(T0 arg0, T1 arg1);
      public delegate S Arrow<T0, T1, T2, S>(T0 arg0, T1 arg1, T2 arg2);
    ...
      public delegate void ArrowVoid();
      public delegate void ArrowVoid<T0>(T0 arg0);
      public delegate void ArrowVoid<T0, T1>(T0 arg0, T1 arg1);
      public delegate void ArrowVoid<T0, T1, T2>(T0 arg0, T1 arg1, T2 arg2);

The `Ti` correspond to the types of the arguments and
`S` corresponds to the type of the result.

For instance, the OCaml types `int -> string -> string` and
`int -> string -> unit` are mapped respectively to the C# types
`Arrow<int,string,string>` and `ArrowVoid<int,string>`.

Note that in OCaml, the two types `int -> string -> string` and
`int -> (string -> string)` are strictly equivalent. For CSML, however,
they are mapped to two different types, namely
`Arrow<int,string,string>` and `Arrow<int,Arrow<string,string>>`.

OCaml functional values are thus mapped to and from C# delegates. In
practice, a small wrapper is added to translate the arguments and
result, and to call the original function or delegate. When an OCaml
function is translated to a C# delegate and the same delegate is sent
again to OCaml, the original value is used (unwrapped), instead of a
re-wrapped version of the delegate (as would be the case for a delegate
that did not originate from an OCaml function). This avoids the
problematic situation where a function which is sent back and forth
between the two languages would become fatter each time because of the
layers used while wrapping a function as a delegate or a delegate as a
function.

Organizing the imported components
----------------------------------

CSML lets the programmer choose how the imported components should be
organized in the target language.

### Choosing file names

A CSML script is made of several sections. Each one describes the
content of a single source file (OCaml or C#) to be produced by the
compiler. For instance, the following script will produce three OCaml
files and three C# files.

    mlstub "ml_stub.ml"
    csstub "cs_stub.cs" InitClass

    mlfile "mymodule1.ml"
    ...

    mlfile "mymodule2.ml"
    ...

    csfile "myfile1.cs"
    ...

    csfile "myfile2.cs"
    ...

The directive `mlstub` lets us choose the name of a special
OCaml source file that contains all the code needed to export OCaml
values to C#. This module should be linked after all the OCaml modules
that define values to be exported to C#.

Similarly, the directive `csstub` allows us to choose the
name of a special C# source file that contains all the code to export
C# components to OCaml and all the glue code between C# and OCaml. The
directive also takes a second argument. It is the name of a class to be
created in the namespace `LexiFi.Interop`. This class has a
static method `void Init()` that must be called (it forces
C# components to be actually exported to OCaml). In the example above,
the call should look like `Lexifi.Interop.InitClass.Init();`.

It is possible to reuse the same name as for the stub files in normal
`mlfile` or `csfile` sections; in that case, the
stub code will simply be appended to the corresponding file.

The decision to split the C# part of the script into several files
makes it possible to link the resulting files into different .NET
assemblies.

This ability to produce several files is much more important for the
OCaml side. Indeed, the name of the `.ml` files constitutes
the first layer in the module hierarchy for fully qualified OCaml names.
Also, because OCaml compilation units cannot be mutually recursive, it
is sometimes necessary to split the CSML script. For instance, one could
imagine in the example above that `mymodule1.ml` imports some
components from C# that are used in a module `foobar.ml`
(written by hand) and that `mymodule2.ml` refers to types
defined in `foobar.ml`. In such a case, the code for
`mymodule1.ml` and `mymodule2.ml` cannot be
merged.

### Namespaces and classes in C#

The C# parts of CSML scripts can be organized in several namespaces and
classes. Namespaces can be defined at the toplevel or within another
namespace. Classes can be defined at the toplevel or within another
class or namespace. The following modifiers are recognized for classes:
`public`, `private`, `static`. The
classes generated by the CSML compiler are always declared
`partial`, which makes it possible to extend them in
hand-written C# source files (as long as they are compiled and linked
together with the files generated by the CSML compiler).

    csfile "myfile1.cs"

    namespace Foo {
      namespace Bar {
        public class A {
          public static class B {
            public static int F1(int) = M.f1;
          }
        }
        public class C {
          public static int X { get = M.f2; set = M.f3; }
        }
      }
    }

In this example we import three functions from OCaml. The function
`M.f1` must have type `int -> int`; it is wrapped
as a static method in the class `Foo.Bar.A.B`. The function
`M.f2` is wrapped as the getter for the static property
`Foo.Bar.C.X`; it must have type `unit -> int`.
Similarly, the function `M.f3` is wrapped as the setter for
the same property. It is possible to define properties with only a
getter or a setter.

### Modules in OCaml

The OCaml parts of CSML scripts can be organized in (nested) modules.

    mlfile "mymodule1.ml"

    module M1: sig
      module A: sig
        val f: int -> int = static MyClass.F1
      end
    end

    val f: int -> int -> unit = static MyClass.F2

    val g: unit -> string = static get MyClass.G
    val h: string -> unit = static set MyClass.G

In this example we import two static methods from the C# class
`MyClass` as two OCaml function `Mymodule1.M1.A.f`
and `Mymodule1.f`. In addition, the OCaml functions
`Mymodule1.g` and `Mymodule1.h` import the getter
and setter for the static method `MyClass.G`.

It is also possible to use OCaml classes to organize code imported from
C#. We will see that later on.

### Inline code

Sometimes it is convenient to insert small fragments of C# or OCaml
code into the code generated by CSML. CSML lets one use the following
syntax in C# or OCaml parts of CSML scripts:

    inline [* ... *]

For instance, the following CSML script defines an additional OCaml
function defined in terms of those imported by CSML:

    mlfile "mymodule.ml"

    module M: sig
      val f_with_id: int -> string -> unit = static Foo.f
      val f_without_id: string -> unit = static Foo.f
      inline [*
        let f ?id s =
          match id with Some id -> f_with_id id s | None -> f_without_id s
      *]
    end

The same syntax can be used to insert comments used by tools that
generate documentation from source code:

    csfile "myfile1.cs"

    namespace Foo {
      inline [*
        /// <summary>
        /// This is a very important class.
        /// </summary>
      *]
      public class A {
      }
    }

Exceptions
----------

Exceptions are properly supported by CSML. An exception raised in one
language is wrapped as an exception of the other language and it can be
captured there. If it goes back to its native language, then the
original exception value is extracted (as opposed to being wrapped
again).

  C#                  | OCaml
  --------------------|-------
  `System.Exception`  | `exn`

The OCaml module `Csml_iface`, which is part of CSML's runtime library
defines an OCaml exception that wraps all the C# exceptions:

    exception Csharp_exception of string * string * cshandle

The first argument is the C# exception's type name. The second argument
is the exception's message. The third one is an opaque pointer to the
original exception.

Similarly, the CSML runtime library defines a C# exception class
`LexiFi.Interop.MLException` that encapsulates OCaml exceptions. The
`Message` property of this exception class calls the OCaml
function `Csml_iface.print_exception` (of type `exn -> string`). It is
possible to provide a custom implementation for this function, using the
`Csml_iface.print_exception_ref` reference. The default implementation
uses `Printexc.to_string` and can be extended by the OCaml part of the
application with custom printers for some exceptions (they can be
registered with `Csml_iface.register_exception_print`).

Exporting OCaml values opaquely
-------------------------------

Up to this point, we have only seen how to import functions (from OCaml
to C#) and static method (from C# to OCaml) that operate on built-in
types (basic types or structural types). It is possible to extend to set
of types that can flow from one language to the other. In this section,
we will see how to create C# classes that wraps OCaml values in an
opaque way. By opaque, we mean that the values themselves always stay in
their native heap (here the OCaml heap); they are never copied. Instead,
a pointer from the target language to the native one is used and wrapped
as a typed object.

### Running example

Let us consider the following OCaml unit `opaque_binding.ml`.

    type t = {
        mutable foo: int;
        mutable bar: int;
      }

    let to_string c = Printf.sprintf "foo = %i, bar = %i" c.foo c.bar
    let get_foo c = c.foo
    let set_foo c x =  c.foo <- x
    let get_bar c = c.bar
    let set_bar c x = c.bar <- x
    let create foo bar = { foo = foo; bar = bar }
    let version () = "1.0"

This module defines a type `t` that we would like to bind to
a C# class. Since values of type `t` encapsulate mutable
states, it would be inappropriate to copy their content to C#.

The following section is enough to let CSML knows about the type
`t` and produces the needed machinery to map values of this
type to and from instances of a class `Counter`:

    public class Counter = Opaque_binding.t {
    }

With this declaration, it is now possible to import functions that
operate on type `Opaque_binding.t` as in:

    public static class MyClass {
      public static void SetFoo(Counter, int) = Opaque_bindng.set_foo;
    }

The static method `SetFoo` wraps the function
`Opaque_binding.set_foo`, which must have type
`Opaque_binding.t -> int -> unit` (because the OCaml type
`Opaque_binding.t`w is in correspondence with the C# class
`Counter`).

It would make more sense to import functions directly related to the
type `Opaque_binding.set_foo` as components of the class
`Counter`. Indeed, CSML lets us define constructors, instance
methods and properties for C# class that wraps OCaml types opaquely.
Constructors can be defined from functions that return values of the
wrapped type. Instance methods reflect functions that take the wrapped
value as an implicit extra first argument. A property getter takes the
wrapped value as their only argument and return the value of the
property. A property setter takes two arguments: the wrapped value and
the new value for the property.

It is possibly to define overloaded constructors and methods following
the regular C# mechanism.

    public class Counter = Opaque_binding.t {
      public Counter(int, int) = Opaque_binding.create;
      public Counter() = [* fun () -> Opaque_binding.create 0 0 *];
      public static Counter Create(int, int) = Opaque_binding.create;
      public int Linear(int) =
       [* fun c i ->
            c.Opaque_binding.foo + i * c.Opaque_binding.bar *];
      public int Bar {
         get = Opaque_binding.get_bar;
         set = Opaque_binding.set_bar;
      }
      public int Foo {
         get = [* fun c -> c.Opaque_binding.foo *];
         set = [* fun c x -> c.Opaque_binding.foo <- x *];
      }
      public static string Version { get = Opaque_binding.version; }
      public override string ToString() = Opaque_binding.to_string;
    }

This is our first use of the notation. It is used here to put inline
OCaml definitions for C# components. All such pieces of OCaml code are
put in the OCaml stub file, so the
code above works as long as we do not add an explicit interface
`opaque_binding.mli` to hide the concrete definition of the type
`t`.

The method `ToString` overrides the corresponding method from
the parent class `Object`.

### Extending the class with custom code

It is not currently possible to specify in the CSML script that a C#
class inherits from another class or implements a C# interface, but it
is possible to add this information in a hand-written C# file, using
the fact that the classed generated by the CSML compiler are partial.
Here is an example of such a hand-written file to show how to express
that `Counter` implements some interface:

    public interface ICounter {
      int Linear(int i);
    }

    public partial class Counter : ICounter {
    }

Of course, it is also possible to add arbitrary extra components to the
class `Counter`.

### About garbage collection

When an OCaml value must be mapped opaquely to C#, a global root is
registered with the OCaml garbage collector and an handle to it is
passed to C#. This is to ensure that the OCaml value will not be
discarded by the garbage collector while the C# code still has a
pointer to it. The global root is released when the C# object that
wraps this handle is released by the C# garbage collector.

It is possible to release explicitly the global root hidden behind the
C# wrapper. To do this, one must declare a special method like that:

    public class Counter = Opaque_binding.t {
    ...
      public void KillMe() = kill;
    ...
    }

The keyword `kill` is recognized by the CSML compiler. When
the method `KillMe` is called, the underlying handle is
released. Any further access will result in an exception being raised.

Exporting C# values opaquely
-----------------------------

In the previous section, we have seen how to wrap OCaml values as C#
objects in a opaque way. We can do the same the other way around, that
is, we can bind arbitrary C# types to custom abstract OCaml types. At
runtime, C# values are kept in the C# heap and the OCaml program only
manipulates pointers to C# values.

### Running example

Let us consider the following C# class that we want to bind to OCaml.

    public class MyClass {
      private int i = 0;
      public MyClass() { }
      public MyClass(int i) { this.i = i; }
      public int Value { get { return i; }   set { i = value; } }
      public void Bump() { i++; }
      public void Bump(int x) { i += x; }

      private static MyClass glb = null;
      public static Global { get { return glb; }  set { glb = value; } }
    }

We can use the following CSML script to bind this class to an abstract
type and import its components as OCaml functions.

    type t = MyClass

    val create: unit -> t = ctor
    val create_init: int -> t = ctor
    val get: t -> int = get Value
    val set: t -> int -> unit = set Value
    val bump: t -> unit = instance Bump
    val bump_n: t -> int -> unit = instance Bump
    val global: unit -> t = static get MyClass.Global

As we can see, we describe on the right-hand side of each declaration
(after the `=` sign) what C# component should be imported.
We had seen previously how to import C# static method
(`static` keyword) and static properties (`static
get`, `static set`). Here we see examples of how to
import constructors (`ctor` keyword), getter and setters for
instance properties (`get`, `set`) and instance
methods (`instance`). Note that for non-static components,
the right-hand sides do not mention the class to which the components
belong. This class is defined implicitly by the first argument (for
properties and instance methods) or by the result type (for
constructors).

Note that the `get` and `set` keywords can be used
to access not only public properties, but also public fields.

### Special methods

The CSML compiler recognizes other possible keywords on the right-hand
side of declarations in OCaml parts. Here we consider three special
pseudo-methods.

##### Checking for nullness

The `MyClass.Global` property can return `null`.
As a consequence, the function `global` above might return
something which is not really an object. It is possible to define a
function that checks whether a value of type `t` is actually
`null` or not:

    val isitnull: t -> bool = isnull

##### Casting

Imagine we have defined two abstract types `t1` and
`t2` to wraps two C# classes `C1` and
`C2`. We can define a function that cast objects of class
`C1` to class `C2`:

    val t2_of_t1: t1 -> t2 = cast

The C# code generated for this cast uses the C# `as`
operator. As a consequence, this function can return null. If we want to
get an option instead of a possibly `null` value (which can
be checked with an `isnull` function as above), we can use
the `nullable` pseudo-type:

    val t2_of_t1: t1 -> t2 nullable = cast

##### Killing the pointer

One can define a function that kills the reference to the underlying C#
object. If such a function is not called on a value that wraps a C#
object, one must wait for the OCaml value to be released by the OCaml
garbage collector before the reference is released (and the C# object
can potentially be released by the C# garbage collector). This is done
by the special keyword `kill`:

    val killit: t1 -> unit = kill

### Indexed accesors

It is possible to define OCaml functions to access indexed properties.
For instance, if the C# class bound to the type `t` has a
property `p` with an indexer that maps strings to integers,
it is possible to define OCaml function like that:

    val get_p: t -> string -> int = indexed get p
    val set_p: t -> string -> int -> unit = indexed set p

If the class bound to `t` itself has such an indexer, we can
use `this` instead of the property name:

    val get_p: t -> string -> int = indexed get this
    val set_p: t -> string -> int -> unit = indexed set this

There are also static variants for the indexed accessors. Imagine that
the C# expression `Foo.Instance` resolves to an object with
a property `p` that defines an accessor as above. We can
define:

    val get_p: string -> int = static indexed get Foo.Instance.p
    val set_p: string -> int -> unit = static indexed set Foo.Instance.p

### Accessing sub-components

It is possible to use the `static`, `instance` and
other keywords to bind directly sub-components as long as they are
expressible as a qualified identifier (with the dot notation). For
instance, we could create OCaml functions that access directly
components of the `Global` property:

    val bump_global: unit -> unit = static MyClass.Global.Bump
    val get_global: unit -> int = static get MyClass.Global.Value

### Ignoring the result

If we want to import a C# method as an OCaml function, we need to
provide the result type of the method, even if we do not care about the
result. For instance, if the method takes an integer and returns a
string, we must write something like:

    val f: int -> string = static Foo.f

It it possible to ignore the result explicitly so that we can use
`unit` as the return type:

    val f: int -> unit = ignore static Foo.f

### Weak references

In many cases, it is not necessary to keep a strong reference to the C#
object. CSML makes it possible to keep only a weak reference which does
not prevent the C# garbage collector from reclaiming the underlying C#
object. This is especially interesting if we have cycles between the two
heaps (e.g. an OCaml record that keep a pointer to a C# object, which
itself keeps a pointer to the OCaml record), because in that case,
without weak references, we would need to explicitly break cycles (e.g.
using pseudo `kill` functions and methods).

We can annotate types of values that flow opaquely from C# to OCaml
with an annotation in order to produce weak references instead of strong
ones. The syntax is `'a weak` in OCaml parts and
`Weak<T>` in C# parts.

    val global_weak: unit -> t weak = static get MyClass.Global
    ...

    public class M {
      public static void F(Weak<MyClass>) = Module.f;
    }

Binding C# classes to OCaml classes
------------------------------------

We have seen that arbitrary C# objects can be wrapped as opaque
pointers in OCaml. It is also possible to wrap them as OCaml objects.

We recall here an example seen above:

    type t = MyClass

    val create: unit -> t = ctor
    val create_init: int -> t = ctor
    val get: t -> int = get Value
    val set: t -> int -> unit = set Value
    val bump: t -> unit = instance Bump
    val bump_n: t -> int -> unit = instance Bump
    val global: unit -> t = static get MyClass.Global

We replace the first line with:

    class t = MyClass : object
    end

The effect of this declaration is that C# objects class
`MyClass` will be reflected in OCaml as objects. The other
definitions are still valid, but the ones that take `t` as
their first argument can be replaced by methods:

    class t = MyClass : object
      method get: int = get Value
      method set: int -> unit = set Value
      method bump: unit = instance Bump
      method bump_n: int -> unit = instance Bump
    end
    val create: unit -> t = ctor
    val create_init: int -> t = ctor
    val global: unit -> t = static get MyClass.Global

Note that the OCaml constructor cannot be used to reflect the C#
constructors. (It is used internally by CSML.)

It is possible to define OCaml methods as importing
`*static*` C# methods, as long as these C# methods takes an
object of the correct class as their first argument.

In addition to the method described explicitly in the CSML script, the
generated class also contains some internal methods.

### Inheritance

Imagine that `C2` is a subclass of `C1` in C#. It
is possible to reflect this in the imported classes:

    class t1 = C1 : object
      ..
    end

    class t2 = C2 : object
      inherit t1
      ...
    end

The OCaml type `t2` will then be a subtype of
`t1`. Up-casting can thus be implemented simply with the
OCaml syntax `(e :> t1)`.

For down-casting, we can use, as expected, the `cast`
keyword. We can simply define a function to do the cast:

    val t2_from_t1: t1 -> t2 nullable = cast

Or we can add this as a method of `t1`:

    class t1 = C1 : object
      val to_t2: t2 nullable = cast
    end

Structurally reflecting OCaml datastructures into C# classes
-------------------------------------------------------------

We have seen how to manipulate opaque handle on arbitrary OCaml values
from C#. Sometimes, we would like to transform structured OCaml values
into native C# values. CSML is able to produce C# class declarations
to reflect OCaml variant and record types, and to translate the OCaml
value to and from this C# representation.

### Records

Imagine that we want to bind some record type defined in OCaml:

    type myrecord = {
      x: int;
      y: myrecord option;
    }

As we have seen before, it is possible to reflect this type opaquely to
C# with a CSML script like:

    public class MyRecord = Structured_mapping.myrecord
    {
    }

If we want instead CSML to copy the record fields into a real C#
object, we need to inform CSML about the concrete definition of the type
`Structured_mapping.myrecord`. We do this by repeating the definition of
the type (with fully explicit paths for OCaml types):

    public class MyRecord = Structured_mapping.myrecord =
      {
        x: int;
        y: Structured_mapping.myrecord option;
      }
    {
    }

From this script, CSML produces a class declaration which implements the
following signature (plus some additional fields for its own internal
use):

    public partial class MyRecord {
      public MyRecord(int, LexiFi.Interop.Option<MyRecord>);
      public int x { get; set; }
      public LexiFi.Interop.Option<MyRecord> y { get; set; }
      ...
    }

Also, the types `Structured_mapping.myrecord` and `MyRecord`
are now available in the rest of the CSML script: values of those types
are copied structurally when crossing the boundary between the
languages.

We can see that the class defines one constructor that takes one
argument for each field of the record, and one property (with a getter
and a setter) for each field.

##### Custom field names

CSML allows one to specify custom names for fields. For instamce, if we
want the OCaml field `x` to produce a property named to
`First` in C#, then we can write:

    public class MyRecord = Structured_mapping.myrecord =
      {
        x as First: int;
        y: Structured_mapping.myrecord option;
      }
    {
    }

##### Private flag

If the OCaml type were declared private, then we should add the same
flag to the CSML script:

    public class MyRecord = Structured_mapping.myrecord =
      private
      {
        x: int;
        y: Structured_mapping.myrecord option;
      }
    {
    }

### Variants

While OCaml record types have a natural translation into C#, this is
less true for variant types. CSML suggests one possible encoding of
variant types into C#. Let us consider the following OCaml type
declaration:

    type myvariant =
      | A
      | B of string * int
      | C of myvariant

As for records, the CSML script to import this type to C# needs to
repeat the type definition:

    public class MyVariant = Structured_mapping.myvariant =
      | A
      | B of string * int
      | C of Structured_mapping.myvariant
    {
    }

The CSML compilers produces an abstract class `MyVariant`:

    public abstract partial class MyVariant {
      public partial class A : MyVariant {
        public A();
      }
      public partial class B : MyVariant {
        public B(string, int)
        public string TVal0 { get; set; }
        public int TVal1 { get; set; }
      }
      public partial class C : MyVariant {
        public C(MyVariant)
        private MyVariant val0;
        public MyVariant TVal0 { get; set; }
      }
      public abstract class MatchVoid {
        abstract public void A();
        abstract public void B(string,int);
        abstract public void C(MyVariant);
        public void run(MyVariant x);
        public static void RunMatch(MyVariant,
                                    LexiFi.Interop.ArrowVoid,
                                    LexiFi.Interop.ArrowVoid<string,int>,
                                    LexiFi.Interop.ArrowVoid<MyVariant>);
      }
      public abstract class Match<T> {
        abstract public T A();
        abstract public T B(string,int);
        abstract public T C(MyVariant);
        public T run(MyVariant);
        public static T RunMatch(MyVariant,
                                 LexiFi.Interop.Arrow<T>,
                                 LexiFi.Interop.Arrow<string,int,T>,
                                 LexiFi.Interop.Arrow<MyVariant,T>);
      }
    }

There is one inner sub-class for each OCaml constructor of the variant
type. Each one looks a lot like the class generated for a record type,
with one constructor and properties for the arguments.

##### Pattern matching

The inner classes `MatchVoid` and `Match<T>` let us define pattern
matching on the type `MyVariant` (`Match<T>` is used when the
pattern matching returns a value). The methods `RunMatch` can
be called directly; they must be given the object of type
`MyVariant` to be inspected and one delegate for each
possible case. The other possible way to implement pattern matching is
to sub-class `MyVariant.MatchVoid` or
`MyVariant.Match<T>` (for some specific `T`).
The sub-class must implement one method for each OCaml constructor of
the variant type. This ensures that the matching is exhaustive. Here is
an example of such a pattern matching class:

    public class VariantMatching : MyVariant.Match<int> {
      override public int A() { return 1; }
      override public int B(string s, int i) { return i; }
      override public int C(MyVariant x) { return this.run(x); }

      public static int Match(MyVariant x) {
        return (new VariantMatching()).run(x);
      }
    }

##### Customizing the generated class

There is one concrete sub-class on the generated class for each case of
the original OCaml type. By default, their names correspond to the OCaml
constructor, but it is possible to provide a custom name. For instance,
if we want to have a class `MyVariant.Bee` instead of
`MyVariant.B`, we can do:

    public class MyVariant = Structured_mapping.myvariant =
      | A
      | B as Bee of string * int
      | C of Structured_mapping.myvariant
    {
    }

It is also possible to give custom names for the arguments of each
constructors, instead of the default `TVal0`,
`TVal1`, …To do this, we use a record-like notation:

    public class MyVariant = Structured_mapping.myvariant =
      | A
      | B as Bee of { name: string; amount: int }
      | C of Structured_mapping.myvariant
    {
    }

##### Private flag

As for records, tf the OCaml type were declared private, then we should
add the same flag to the CSML script.

Mapping C# enumerations into OCaml variants of polymorphic variants
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The CSML compiler supports binding C# enumerations to OCaml variants or polymorphic variants.

**TODO: write the doc**


Resolution of recursive types
-----------------------------

We have seen in the previous sections how to extend the set of
admissible types by specifying bindings between OCaml and C# types. As
expected for C# looking code, it is possible to refer in a C# section
to any type defined anywhere in the script. For instance, the following
is legal:

    csfile "myfile1.cs"

    namespace X {
      class A {
        public static void f(B, C) = Foo.f;
        // B refers to the one defined in myfile2.cs, which reflects an ML type
        // C refers to the class C to be provided by an extra C# source file
        //   of the project
      }
    }

    csfile "myfile2.cs"

    class B = Foo.t { }

    mlfile "mymodule1.ml"

    type s = C
      // This informs csml about the C# type C

In this example, the module `foo.ml` must define a type
`t` and a function `f` of type
`t -> Mymodule1.s -> unit`.

Maybe more suprisingly, the type definitions are also fully mutually
recursive for the OCaml sections. The following is thus valid:

    mlfile "mymodule1.ml"

    module A: sig
      type t = Foo.A
      val a_to_b: t -> B.t = cast
    end

    module B: sig
      type t = Foo.B
      val b_to_a: t -> A.t = cast
    end

To support this kind of recursion, CSML actually generates all OCaml
type declarations together (with mangled names) and then use those
types. The code above would produce a file `mymodule1.ml`
that looks like:

    type mymodule1_a_t
    type mymodule1_b_t

    module A = struct
      type t = mymodule1_a_t
      let a_to_b : mymodule1_a_t -> mymodule1_b_t = ...
    end

    module B = struct
      type t = mymodule1_b_t
      let b_to_a : mymodule1_b_t -> mymodule1_a_t = ...
    end

To support recursion between several units, if the CSML script has
several OCaml sections, then all the type declarations go at the
beginning of the file generated from the first one (which thus has a
special role). In general this is ok. But if this file comes with an
explicit interface (`.mli`), then those mangled type
declarations might not be available where they needed. In that case, a
solution is to add an extra empty OCaml section at the beginning of the
CSML script to act as a container for the type declaration. For
instance, the following script will force all the type declaration to go
to a specific file `mymodule_types.ml`.

    mlfile "mymodule_types.ml"


    mlfile "mymodule1.ml"

    module A: sig
      type t = Foo.A
      val a_to_b: t -> B.t = cast
    end

    module B: sig
      type t = Foo.B
      val b_to_a: t -> A.t = cast
    end

Dependent CSML scripts
----------------------

It is of course possible to use several CSML scripts for a single
application. This modularity is especially useful if we want to use CSML
to import library from one language to the other.

As we have seen, in addition to specifying how to import components from
one language to the other (functions, methods), a CSML script also
defines a correspondence between C# and OCaml types. In a CSML script,
it is possible to refer to an external script with a `use`
directive:

    mlstub ...
    csstub ...

    use "external.csml"

Now, in the rest of this script, it is possible to use the type
correspondence as defined by `external.csml` (and the ones
defined in scripts referred to from this one, and so recursively). For
instance, if `external.csml` defines that an OCaml type
`A.t` is an opaque counterpart for the C# type
`Foo.A`, then we can use those OCaml and C# types in the
current script.
